Cognitive Factory Documentation
===============================

Overall Process
---------------

Cognition

Cognition is the overal mechanisms the brain computation allied to memoization processes use to
let us know and deal with our environment understanding. Our social culture deals with complex operations
invoved in language onstrution and concept elaboration. This will use high level semantic and cultural
operators. At the lowest level, all our high level thinking will overlay a set of basic logical
computations which elementary object is a predicate. Most historical philosophers elaborated
logical theories, some of them attempting to elaborate a formal representation of how
ideas were working together (Witgenstein, Boole, Von Neumann). Although human thinking cannot
be reduced to elementary logical rationalied operations, people lacking of such basic operators
will present difficulties to adapt their outside pereption and thus behaviour to the "common
logial sense" of living. These operators allow us to process predicates (or facts) in order
to make a decision and build our own action path.    


What is the cognitive factory ? 

The cognitive factory is an activity that works around those elementary conceptual and logical
operators, not the way a computer or calculation unit does, reducing ideas to some calculable
encoding, but proposing high level idea processing operators that could be applied to ideas
in order to organie them, filter them, elaborate variants, display them in some representations
that favour new ideas emergence.

The Cognitive Factory activity

The Cognitive Factory activity has been designed to propose a rich cognitive toolbox capable to
produce cognitive exerices adressing a contextualied pedagogical purpose of the teacher, as well 
as providing activities for discovering the cognitive processes themselves. The module will be
thus used either as an ativity generator or a cognitive demonstrator depending on the teacher's
guidance and project.  

The Cognitive Factory addresses several learning situations regarding attendants configuration,
such as autonomy learning, group brainstorming, ideas and synthesis negociation, etc. 

Construction of the Cognitive Factory
-------------------------------------

The Cognitive Factory drives a single cognitive process based on an initial collection
of ideas by the learners or the teacher. This is usually the start point. From this point
will be involved 5 activity phases, each being assignable to either the learner or the teacher.

Depending of to whom each step is assigned will change the overall topology and application
of the activity, generating a brand original exercice type.

Phases are

Phase 1 : Ideas collection

Users provide textual predicates (ideas) to the factory. This might be done f.e. during some
among of time, before going on next steps. Ideas can be fed in a "single user scope" process
(each user bringing ideas in his own space whithout collective visibility) or in a group
brainstorm process, sharing ideas with the group.

Phase 2 : Operations selection and setup

Once a pool of ideas has been collected, and enough stuff is available to "think" with, some
applicable operators have to be choosen in order to build the cognitive exercice. Again, this
can (usually) be done by the teacher, but there is sense the learners be asked to make this choice
in some activity configuration. At the moment, this choice will be global to the activity instance.

Phase 3 : Operation execution

The users are asked to use the operators to process the initial set of ideas and propose an output.
This outcome is always individual, but might be influenced by less or more information visible over
what other people is doing aside.

Phase 4 : Outcome display and confrontation

In this phase is assumed sufficiant data has been input for results exploitation and matching or
non macthing to make sense. The Display phase attemps to give users a panorama over complete responses
which scope depends on overal or local privacy settings. The purpose of display layouts is to help
some conclusion to emerge from the initial rough set of predicates.

Phase 5 : Feedback and synthesis

This is the last activity step that asks to participants to write a motivated synthesis over experimentation
and outcoming conslusions. This step is reduced to a simple online text editor where to write report. 

Extra phase : Evaluation

When the module is used in an evaluated process, a grade can be elaborated by graders to participate to
the gradebook compilation. The evaluation only can be used by teachers (graders). In the evaluation process can a 
feedback be posted by teachers to users, that will display in the synthesis panel. 

Phase scheduling

Phases can be proposed sequentially or with parallel access. When used sequentially, the learner only
can access to the currently enabled phase. The teachers has full control over which phase is being enabled
for the whole activity instance. Note that there is no provision to enable a distinct phase per group. 

Operators regarding phases

Each operator must provide a local processing for the phases 2, 3 and 4. The setup parameters depend on
the operator's meaning and algorithm. 

The actual operation panel will provide the factory with a suitable interface adapted to what the operator 
asks to do. Usually, the operation panel asks the user to proceed to his own proessing, generating answers
belonging to him. This standard goal might be affected by the user's role, and the assignation of the phase
(whether it has to be handled by learner or teacher). 

The display provided by operators will trend to give some individual and collective representation of information,
depending on the privacy settings. The usual interface required for an operator is 

* first to give a summary of the user's position and choices, independantly to the surrounding community.
* secondly to give some additional cognitive value that helps adding meaning to the choices or manipulations
that were made in prior phase.
* Finally, to compare and oppose individual results to collective trends and/or detailed results.

Pedagogic situations and privacy
================================

This paragraph will deal with particular aspects of individualiation or collective use of the Cognitive Factory.

Operators
=========

Operators are plugins, so an extension capability is provided to the Factory for further evolution.

The basic set of operators are typical cognitive operations educated people makes thousands times
a day. Some may be small variants or just another point of view (such as ordering and quantifying, reducing by
elimination or by merging).

Standard operators are:

Categorizing :
--------------

Complexity level : 1 or 2 (2 if categories have to be identified)

The purpose is to help people simplifying the understanding of a lot of dispersed ideas by joining
them within a category. This reduction helps people in understanding abstraction and the "class" 
logical process.

Ordering :
----------

Complexity level : 1

The ordering operator is the basic process of telling what is above or beneath in an absolute
or relative order stack. This is important in terms of ation theory, as a tool of elicitation
of priorities in life.

Quantifying :
-------------

Complexity level : 2

The quantifying operator adds an additional complexity level over ordering by asking to 
tell what amount of distance separates items in a quantified way. This addresses evaluation
of quantities, that may not be possible in all use cases.

The outome of monodimensional quantification is to find a rational mean to group subsets
by "proximity" of a valued quantified attribute. Given a "proximity radius", and applying
this proximity range to the quantified objects, an "inside/outside" discrimination can be 
operated, and some "isolated groups" can be discriminated with a high consistancy probability.  

Reducing (by elimination) :
---------------------------

Complexity level : 3

Information reduction is a cognitive process that we use apparently "instinctively". In fact a complex
logical mental mechanism is involved in the elimination procedure. This mechanism needs first to order
information and further determine a threshold of acceptability. If information can be quantified with
an objective criteria, and the threshold can be determined without constraint (arbitrary), the operation
of reduction is mechanical and remains easy. When the environement adds complex constraints such as 
multicriteria influence, or cannot precisely and rationally determine threshold value, things get
more difficult to solve.

The redution by elimination does not provide a rational method to help processing redution on objketive
basis. This is NOT the actual purpose of the operator. It will just define goals of redution, and let
the user's cognitive process to solve the requirement.

The operator will ask to keep a subset of the input set, with a more or less strict rule, and let the
user choose the intellectual method that he will process.

Reducing (by merging) :
-----------------------

Complexity level : 4

In this operator, the goal is similar to the reduction by elimination operator, that is, getting an 
discriminated subset of the incoming set. The exercice adds a level of complexity by allowing the reduction
to generate new predicates (merged predicates) issued from a synthesis of a subset of the input predicates.
Alternatively, "one of" the input predicates could also be choosen as reduction solution.

Hierarchization :
-----------------

Complexity level : 3

The hierarchization operator asks to arrange predicates into a hierarchy. Working with a hierarchy deals 
with a simultaneous pair of operationw which are related to the two dimensions of the tree organiation : 
dealing with the depth, and dealing with a choie of parent in the current subbranch. Mathematicians agree
to say a tree organisation has a dimension a xxxxxxxx . The dimension of the organisation struture usually
gives some evidences about the mental algorithm used by our brain. The tree organisation adds an extra 
cognitive action wich is called "recursive" lookahead. 

Tree based exerices are known as complex cognitive processing inthat way that some elements to be organized
are also involved into the organisation struture, thus having dual existance.

2D Mapping :
------------

Complexity level : 3

2D mapping is a bidimensional extension of the Quantifying process. As the monodimensional quantifying 
allows to discriminate and identify subsets sufficiently isolated from other samples, the bidimensional
representation can use a circular "proximity radius" to process the same operation using two quantifying
independant parameters. 

Relationship Mapping :
----------------------
 
Complexity level : 5

The relationship operator provides a powerfull tool for analysing crossdependancies and systemic
feedback loops. The samples needs to be predicates used by a relationship function. A classical 
example of systemic analysis could use price of macroeconomic indicators surch as promary products 
and services market price such as sugar, oil, transportation, wheat, bread, milk, wood, etc. 
and check interdpendancy factors of all these prices.
